---
title: Back in the Classroom - Week 2 
date: 2025-03-18T07:55:33-04:00
tags:
- teaching
categories:
- teaching
draft: false
--- 

So last week I completed my second and final week back at Stuy
teaching CS. We spent Monday finishing up the mode lesson and then
spent most of the week on [[https://cestlaz.zamansky.net/cestlaz-old-hugo.github.io/posts/2014-01-07-rot13-gateway/][this]] topic - writing a computer program to
automatically decode something "encrypted" with a Caesar Cipher. The
post I just linked to was from when I first taught the lesson. I've
refined and reworked it considerable since then but the gist is the
same.

This time, after running the cipher, we took a detour - I asked about
what things they considered when purchasing a new laptop - they gave
me all sorts of features like price, weight, screen size and more.

We then compared laptops by a single feature, say price, then two -
maybe price and weight. This led to an x y graph - one axis price, the
other weight. Ultimately this led to us normalizing the features
(making them all within the same range) and then the distance formula
which we can use in 2D, 3D or any higher dimension.

When everything was done, we were able to apply the distance formula
to all the rotations of an encoded sentence and for each, compare the
letter frequencies of the rotated sentence with the letter frequencies
expected in an English sentence. The rotation closest to the expected
frequencies was always the answer, provided that we had a long enough
sentence to provide sufficient data.

We didn't get to build a completed program to do the decryption in
class but we build some of the code, all of the key algorithms and did
end up building the scaffolding needed - a subgoal labeled Python
file.

That took us through Thursday. We probably could have completed the
program if we continued on Friday but I thought that doing an AMA
might be more fun and more valuable. After the weekend passed I did
send along a finished program in case anyone wanted it and I
encouraged them to write their own.

After my last class, I spent about an hour speaking with a few Stuy
seniors and then I was off. This week, back to retirement with their
regularly scheduled teacher back from grand jury duty.

I hope the kids had a good two weeks and got something out of the
classes. I certainly enjoyed the time I spent with them.

Overall the in class vibe was similar to what I was used to,
particularly if you allow for the fact that I was only in for two
weeks so couldn't develop the same level of rapport with the
students. I mean, I think I did okay - I was even gifted a mini lemon
pie on my last day (3/14) which my me and my family promptly devoured
later that evening. On the other hand, I was told by some Stuy faculty
members that some things have changed - phone use, for instance is
much more rampant with more kids glued to their devices when in the
halls. In my classes, I had a few kids on devices or even on the
computers doing non class stuff while in class but I didn't stress
about it due to the nature of my time there. Also, it didn't
necessarily mean the student wasn't engaged. I had one kid who kept
playing a snake type game on the computer. Once, the person who was
the official sub chastised her (I was unofficial, but that's another
story). After class, I apologized to her and told her I didn't mind
that she was on the computer doing something that I consider a modern
day version of doodling. The reason was because she was actually
always engaged - participating in discussion, completing assignments
and in every respect, besides the "doodling" being an active engaged
student.

I also, over the course of the two weeks got to meet a number of
StuyCS seniors and had great informal conversations with a number of
them. I'm going to save that though for a concluding post on my time
back at Stuy. 

As a final note, the CS and Math teachers were amazingly warm and
welcoming - it was like I had never left, even with the people I had
never met before. Likewise with the teachers I ran into from other
departments.

On the other hand, one particular AP made for a much less smooth
experience. Not the person in charge of the CS department - she was
delightful and helpful, but rather the AP Admin. When I was first
asked to do this, I said okay but the AP Admin said they couldn't hire
me for a partial schedule of only 3 classes (rather than 5). That's
false. Then other obstacles were thrown in the way. Apparently, he
thought it better that the students receive no instruction rather than
make the least effort to smooth the way. Finally, when it was okayed
that I come in (on a volunteer basis), he refused to let me get a
temporary ID which necessitated other people being inconvenienced
daily to come and sign me in.

Now, had a decent AP Admin been at the helm, I would just have been
hired part time. If something came up to make that impossible, they
would have appealed to the PA or Alumni association for a modest
honorarium and certainly they'd have given me the ability to come in
without stealing precious time from some teacher on a non teaching
period to sign me in.

So, those were my two weeks back as a teacher. It was weird to have to
be at a specific place and time every day for two weeks - I had gotten
used to the freedom of having no set time obligations but it was a fun
two weeks.

No way I'll be going back full time, but if the StuyCS team needs me
again, I'd be ready and able to pinch hit. 









