---
title: CS Ed Podcast, connecting with students, and a little AI
date: 2025-09-07T14:38:00-04:00
tags:
- education
- community
categories:
- education
draft: false
--- 

I listened to the [[https://csedpodcast.org/blog/s4e12_tpb_meet_the_prof/][latest episode]] of Kristen Stephen-Martinez's CS Ed
Podcast. The episode focused on Professor Emeritus, William G. Griswold, of UCSD's practice of requiring students meet with him 
outside of class early during the semester. These meetings weren't
about class material but rather to foster a better connection and to
increase student engagement.

Good episode. Take a listen.

The class in question was an upper division software engineering
class - mostly majors but a significant percent of non-majors. Due to
class size, individual meetings were impractical so students met in
small groups.

One interesting thing that came up, but it's really not a surprise was
that in spite of this being an upper division class, one third of the
students had never spoken to a CS professor prior to these required
meetings. Another interesting part of the discussion involved AI but
I'll get to that later.

I love this practice.

Clearly Professor Griswold cares about his students and understands
the importance of making connections. I also love the small group
aspect of these meetings as it makes the meetings less intimidating
and also helps develop connections from student to student as well as
student to instructor. It also didn't seem to be a huge extra expense
in time. By scheduling these meetings early, they can essentially fill
in for office hours which, for many instructors are sparsely attended,
particularly early in the semester.

Unfortunately, I'm not convinced that too many college instructors
would implement such a practice because. I'll keep my reasons to
myself so as to not offend anyone.

When I taught at Hunter, I would encourage students to come to office
hours but due to my specific situation, I didn't feel a need to use
office hours to build a connection. I was running a special honors
program and would be running special events throughout the semester
with the kids so we all had plenty of opportunities to get to know
each other.

When I started teaching at Stuy, around 1993, I tried a similar
practice, but in high school, it just wasn't practical. Instead of
around 200 students, the number Griswold cited, I had about 150 but I
couldn't do group meetings since I was teaching regents math and the
discussions would frequently have a component about the students
work. High School teachers also just don't have the time or space. I
taught 5 out of 8 periods and had a professional period where I was
tasked to do something by the school. That left 40 minutes for lunch
and 40 for prep - not enough to even get grading and lesson planning
done let alone meeting students. Couldn't really do it after school
either. Besides me no longer being on the clock, can't ask students to
arbitrarily stay.

So, while I love the practice, in high school, it's largely a no go
unless the school actually sets up a system where these connections
can be made. Back in the day, we had homeroom - 10 minutes every day
with the same homeroom teacher. Not the same as connecting with all
your instructors but it did, if the teacher and class wanted, allow
for connections within that cohort. Unfortunately, at least at Stuy,
daily homeroom is no more. Other schools have "advisory" periods which
can function similarly but I think they're too few and far
between. The human side of education has consistently been
marginalized for more test prep and teaching for jobs.

That human side brings me to another point of the podcast - the rise
if genAI, both as a resource for students on their own and genAI TAs
and tutors.

In the podcast it was noted that students usually won't go to a
professor until after they've exhausted other resources including
genAI. With AI tutors and TAs it's even worse - with them,
institutions are effectively encouraging students to avoid human
interactions.

I mentioned this in my [[https://cestlaz.zamansky.net/posts/school-start-fall-2025/][last post]] - how the big difference at Stuy was
that kids are so much more self absorbed in their phones and other
devices and not interacting with each other. That's also a theme I
keep hearing across education - that kids don't know how to interact
with each other nor with adults. This is why things like advisory or
regular homeroom in high school and practices like Prof. Griswold's
are so important - so much more important than people realize.

I've long maintained that connections and relationships are critical
in education so thanks to William G. Griswold for your practice and
for sharing it and thanks to Kristen Stephens-Martinez for providing
the platform.





