---
title: CSTA 2025 Part 1 - overview and keynotes
date: 2025-07-13T19:14:10-04:00
tags:
- CSTA
categories:
- CSTA
draft: false
--- 

Just got back from CSTA 2025. Well, not directly. Last Monday Devorah
and I got in the car and drove to Cleveland for the
festivities. Unfortunately, we couldn't stay for the duration - I had
to miss Friday so we could drive down to Lancaster to meet the kids
for our annual [[https://cherrycrestfarm.com/things-to-do/corn-maze/][corn maze]] weekend. Drove back to NY today.

That means it's time for my annual recap of the Computer Science
Teachers Association's annual conference.

Last year was in Vegas, this year Cleveland - a much better
destination as far as I'm concerned but I'll talk about the city in
the last post in the series.

The TL;DR is that if you're a K12 CS teacher, you should really try to
attend. The conference has just gotten better year after year and
there's something for everyone - from CS newbie to industry pro turned
teacher, from first year to 20+ year vet, from K all the way up to 12.

That said, to me, it's always been more of a people conference than a
session conference. While I've always found some good sessions, it's
been more about the people. Maybe that's because I probably don't fit
the profile of the majority of attendees but that's fine, I still get
and got value out of the sessions but get so much more out of the
conversations and the connections (and the fact that an introverted,
a-social, socially awkward computer geek like me can walk away from
CSTA with new connections is a testament to how open and friendly to
conference is).

For this post, I'll talk about the keynotes. Usually a highlight but
to be honest, they just didn't do it for me this year. I think that
was mostly due to the format. I also wasn't able to attend the
closing keynote - probably the one I was looking forward to the most,
so I can't comment on that one. I also want to emphasize that it was a
great conference so even though I'm nitpicking on what I felt was the
weakest part of the conference here, the whole show was a big win.

All the keynotes I attended followed the same basic format. The MC
hyped the audience and thanked the sponsors, Various announcements
were shared and we also got a flash talk given by CSTA Impact Fellows,
formerly known as CSTA Equity Fellows. This was followed by the actual
keynote address. The end result was that much of each sixty minute
keynote block had elapsed before the keynote even started. Two of the
three keynotes I attended were panels and the result was a super short
keynote that, to be honest, felt lacking.

The first keynote started with representatives form CSForDetroit,
Cleveland State, and CodeCrew talk about their accomplishments
followed by a minipanel made up of educators who worked with each of
these organizations. Given the short amount of time, we ended up with
three short flash talks by the first group and a super mini
panel. Overall, I felt it was something of a cheer leading talk but I
neither felt inspired nor that I really learned anything. There also
wasn't any time for audience questions.

Overall, it was fine, nice stories about three organizations working
in CS Ed but for a keynote, I was hoping for more.

The day 2 keynote was also a panel, or rather three speakers, Maya
Israel, Tia Madkins, and Deborah Fields each giving a flash talk
followed by a mini panel. The title was "Theory and Practice:
Innovative CS Teaching Strategies." Again, the talks were fine but I
didn't leave with any teaching strategies. Maya Israel talked about
barriers facing students, learner variability, accessibility and more
but in a very course overview manner. Tia Madkins talked about Justice
Oriented Teaching and Learning and Deborah Fields talked about bias.

All of this was fine but none had the time to really dive into their
subjects. The mini-panel similarly felt short and rushed.

At the end, the MC said we could learn more by attending any of the
three speakers sessions later in the conference.

Basically, the keynote was really an advertisement for the three
speaker's full sessions. This left me cold. I'd much rather have heard
from one of the three and actually walked away a deeper dive into the
theory and maybe something concreted in terms of practice.

Thursday's keynote was a solo by Jaleesa Trapp: "Fostering a
Generation of Creative and Ethical Thinkers in the Age of AI." Trapp
talked about creativity and justice, and the fact the one size doesn't fit
all for CS Education, though that's true for all education. She also
described an environmental justice project that grew into a far
greater environmental justice effort. There was a brief mention of
facial recognition and the related bias but I didn't see any AI
connection in the talk. Again, it was fine, but the same talk could
have been given five years ago before the AI boom. Nothing wrong with
the talk, it was engaging but I didn't see any strong AI link. It also
felt, somewhat like a teaser for another later session.

As I said, I had to leave before the last keynote.

So all were fine but nothing particularly inspiring. I think CSTA
would be better served giving more of the keynote block to the actual
keynote. If they want to highlight the Impact Fellows, either extend
the block length or do those together in a block of their own.

So, that's my take on the keynotes. Fine but not the highlights of the
conference. We'll get to those in the next few posts.






