---
title: Has the CSTA jumped the shark?
date: 2025-02-21T11:50:55-04:00
tags:
- CSTA
- PD
- Professional Development
categories:
- CSTA
draft: false
---

That's the Computer Science Teacher's Association to you.

Has it?

Well, that's a personal question. I think it has for me but I'm sure
for other people, that jump the shark moment will be far off or never.

I'm ruminating on this now as a result of a recent change in their
membership policy. Going from two tiers - one free and one costing $50
a year to a single tier $50 membership. If you're currently a member,
you can elect not to pay the $50 and still keep access to a limited
set of resources.

Alfred Thompson wrote a great blog post with his take on the
change [[https://blog.acthompson.net/2025/02/csta-ends-free-membership.html][here]].

When CSTA started it was free. Back then, there were far fewer
computer science teachers and while I joined early on, I saw very few
opportunities to get involved. That's not to say there weren't any or
plenty, just none crossed my path. At one point I did try to reach out
to their leadership but I found them dismissive. I got an email back
seeming to indicate "well, you're at Stuyvesant so what you do doesn't
count."

Anyway, in 2009 or so I had the opportunity to get more involved so I
did. That led me to feeling that back then the CSTA existed for CSTA and they
expected the membership to work for the benefit of the central
organization.

Some time around 2018 or 2019, I felt that changed. To me, anyway, it
seemed like the emphasis really turned around to support the teachers
and local chapters. I applauded the change and many of the efforts.

That was around the same time that CSTA announced CSTA+ - the $50
membership. I immediately joined. Not for the extras that it provided
but just to support the organization. I think a lot of other people
joined for the same reasons.

Personally, I've never found the CSTA materials and resources useful. That's not an
indictment of them. I haven't found anything on code.org useful
either. That's probably because I came in to teaching with a strong CS
background and had developed a robust High School CS program before
CSTA ever existed - I was ahead of the curve. I wasn't happy then and
still am disappointed when I see a lack of actual CS coming out of
CSTA but in any event, I knew that the materials weren't for me, they
were for newer teachers and teachers just coming to the subject.

For a while there, even though I wasn't really the audience, I felt I
could get behind and support the CSTA.


Fast forward to today. Why to me has CSTA jumped the shark?

Some time in the last year, I decided that I wasn't happy with the
direction of CSTA. I was particularly unhappy with the board of
directors election process. I had applied to be on the slate. I
assumed there would be some manner of open process - the membership
would either vote or they'd cull down the candidates in some open and
fair way and then vote on the final slate.

Nope.

I was told that the committee decided to go with other candidates for
the election.

Is my opinion on this sour grapes? Maybe but I don't think so. When I
read the candidate bios I left feeling that some candidates were
equally or better qualified to be on the slate than I was but then,
some, in my opinion brought much less to the table.

Had there been an open process that left me and others off the slate I
would have been fine with it but I was left feeling that the committee
that made the decision was massaging the slate so as to get the board
of directors they wanted.

I was also unhappy with the tone and direction of CSTA for a variety
of other reasons.

So that's when I decided to drop down from CSTA+ to CSTA free tier.

I still wanted to go to this years conference, however. When I went to
register, I saw that the free tier registration was $50 more
expensive, which was fine, and that those additional $50 would pay to
put me back into CSTA+. Every time I think I'm out, they pull me back
in!!!!! :-)

Then I started getting the emails about the new dues structure urging
me to upgrade.

Weird. I though when I registered for the conference, that took care
of the upgrade. Turns out, I won't be upgraded until the actual
conference. Okay, weird and not a great look based on emails but
that's fine.

So that's why the CSTA has jumped the shark for me but I wouldn't be
surprised if this membership change makes them jump the shark for a
much wider set of CS teachers.

Alfred, in his post already talked about the cost and how many CS
teachers are also from other disciplines and those costs multiply
across subjects.

The big one to me though is that CSTA central will only support local
chapter events solely for paid CSTA members. I hope I'm understanding
this one incorrectly but a big part of local meetings should be
working to get more teachers involved. That means meetings with non
CSTA members in the hopes of roping them in.

If CS was like math and had been around as a school subject area
forever then saying "hey, pay $50 and then and only then can you go to
the club meetings" might play a little better.  Might but that's no
certainty and we're nowhere near being close to ready for it.

I get that money might be tight but in my opinion, if the CSTA wants
to be long term viable as a teachers organization (as opposed to a top
down organization paid for by say the Googles of the world) then they
have to support local efforts that bring in more teachers even if
those local efforts are still working to get their legs under them.

I'm also curious as to what the messaging will be with conference
registration. If they're smart, since there will only be on $50 tier
it will be marketed as "come to our conference and get a free years
membership."

So, will this positively or negatively affect membership? While I
don't have any numbers, at least CSTA meeting numbers in New York City
isn't particularly high and is largely dominated by teaching adjacent
people. This always struck me as odd since New York City's CSForAll
initiative has resulted in tons of schools offering CS but those
teachers don't come out. Add a $50 membership fee and I don't expect
the numbers to rise.

Of course, outside of New York City, things could be very different. 

In any event, we'll see how many more CSTA conferences I attend but I
don't see myself engaging much with CSTA other than that under the new
proposed model with the CSTA going in its current direction.

It'll be interesting to see how membership and attitudes change moving
forward.

