---
title: CSTA 2025 3 - day 2
date: 2025-07-16T08:49:46-04:00
tags:
- CSTA
categories:
- CSTA
draft: false
--- 

Four sessions up for today.

First one  "Certified to Rock: Cleveland's Journey in CS Teacher
Prep." Basically a discussion of the pathways for teachers to become
CS certified in Cleveland. It wasn't a crowded session and most of the
attendees were affiliated with Cleveland's certification programs in
one way or another. Then there were a handful of people like me from
assorted locations who wanted to hear more. I mention this not as a
criticism but to wonder about the composition of conference
attendees. It would make sense that most teachers in Ohio would
already know this info and it probably wouldn't be of interest to
teachers in other states. That would leave people in higher ed,
advocacy, or government who might be working on certification or
teacher training in their own states. The fact that this wasn't a
super crowded session as compared to the direct teaching related
sessions is probably a good thing.

The speakers took us through their journey starting in 2014 citing the
same reasons as most other states for pushing CS education. They ended
up with three pathways. An endorsement which is composed of 6 courses,
a PD moddel and what they called advanced training. I was left
wondering if both the PD model, which I think is woefully insufficient
is still used now that the endorsement exists and wasn't clear as to
what the "advanced training" entailed.

As to the 6 course endorsement. It sounded similar, at least in spirit
to what I designed for Hunter College's Advanced Certificate
program. They said that programs had to cover both CS content and
pedagogy but didn't share details. Their program, like mine was all
remote - something that I don't think is ideal for teacher prep but
when you have to accommodate teachers all across the state from one
location, there really isn't any other choice. I also left feeling
that just like in NY, some Ohio institution could offer a really
awesome 6 course sequence while another could create 6 joke courses,
focus on their state's content exam, and call it a day.

The session also featured teachers who have completed certification
sharing some of their work. 

All in all, an interesting session for me. I had a few questions
afterwards but I was able to find out some more information as the
speakers had a booth in the exhibit hall.

For a future conference, an interesting session might be to have four
representatives from four different states compare and contrast
requirements and offerings.

Next up was "Charting the Course: Building Data Literacy and Data
Science Learning Progressions" run by Tiffany Davis, Chris Orban, Jake
Koressel, and Mahmoud Harding.

For my money this was the session of the day.

The lead question was "What should students know about data science?"

Some of the things that were brought up was how that in some locations
data literacy is already in math and science standards. Also
challenges like that in Ohio you can only teach a course in data
science if you're a math teacher, other teachers can only integrate
data science into other classes.

Also, as part of the discussion, Jake Koressel spoke on data science,
data literacy and the CSTA standards, currently under revision.

What made the session so compelling was how it was run. During part of
the session, run by Mahmoud Harding, there were cards on each table
with various aspects of data science and data literacy. At the tables
we discussed what aspects were most important and why.

This lead to a discussion of what was important for all students vs
what was important for a student using data science in a career. 

The discussion was rich and valuable. At one point, at my table, we
were discussing fundamental skills. One person at the table was
pushing story telling - something that is indeed important since at
the end of the day, it's the story that wins support. I pushed back
that having a data BS detector was more fundamental since story
telling can be quite convincing yet devoid of facts.

I can't speak to all tables but the table I was at had healthy
respectful disagreement, compromise and resolution.

Most importantly, I think most of the attendees left the room thinking
about the issues.

Another highlight of the session was that after knowing him online for
years, I was finally able to meet Chris Orban in person. Same for
another couple of people at the session.

Third session wasn't really for me. The title was "Faith-based and
community partnerships to broaden stem access for Youth." I was
curious about this session for two reasons.

One, if it was an inappropriate session (it wasn't). I was turned off by
the listing of a BOF at SIGCSE. It was titled "All Scripture is Useful
for Teaching: CS Education through a Christian Worldview." It was a
BOF specifically advertised "for Christians at SIGCSE..." Now, I
wasn't actually against the session and considered going to it. I was
turned off because right prior to SIGCSE there was a big todo about
some sessions being rejected because they weren't inclusive or the
language in their description wasn't inclusive. Using the language
"for Christians at SIGCSE" to describe who the session was for is
certainly *not* inclusive.

Anyway, that was SIGCSE. Part of me was wondering if this session
would be similar.

On the other hand, I figured it would more likely be something
interesting and useful, something like "hey, you don't have an after
school program, here's how you can partner with your Church,
Synagogue, or Mosque to do some cool stuff for your kids and your
community."

So, the session was more on the later but was really more of a report
on the partnerships that a group at Texas State set up. I didn't feel
that I walked away with any actionable advice.

For the last session of the day, I attended "Handy 'back pocket code'
and code explanations for APCSA" run by Colleen Lewis and Maria
Camarena.

Since I'm not teaching APCS and won't be in the future, I knew that
there would be nothing useful for me personally at this session. I
also knew that Colleen runs a great session so it would be fun. Also,
Colleen made a throw away remark that I thought was really interesting
and will likely spawn its own blog post after I'm done with the CSTA
posts.

The gist was using the idea of literate programming - that is code
surrounded by extensive commenting. Here's an example: [[https://docs.google.com/document/d/13FhQmRAXa3LS_vZDWz1x4Jh6vJoGFK99sxA_G5zf4AU/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.cevtg3x1wei1][link]]. What was
interesting was that different teachers, some who've used the idea and
some who didn't had very different takes on how, when, and why use
them. Some thought that the annotations could be too busy but felt
that annotated snippets could be a great resource for review and
reference. Others liked them later in the course when the annotations
were more targeted. Still others liked the idea from the get go.

I loved it. I'm a big proponent for teachers having a large tool kit
of techniques and pulling them out and using them, customized, as
needed. This was just that.

As I said, nothing for me personally as a retired teacher but fun,
informative, and I'm betting pretty useful for attendees still
teaching CS.

So, that was day 2.

Still to come - day 3, the exhibit hall and hallway track, the
reception and party, and a bit on Cleveland.

