---
title: On Slide Decks
date: 2025-03-29T11:48:52-04:00
tags:
- pedagogy
categories:
- teaching
draft: false
--- 

Based on some of the feedback I got on my [[https://cestlaz.zamansky.net/posts/daily-aim/][last post]], I thought I'd
dive a little deeper on using slide decks.

I had some people tell me that they too found that slide decks didn't
work for them while others shared that they use them regularly. Still
others shared how they specifically used them.

Now, as I said, they don't work for me. Sorry if I wasn't clear. I
didn't mean that they never worked or didn't work for anybody. The
important thing is that slides or complete slide decks are tools and
can be used for good or for ill. What's important is that a teacher is
intentional about the practices they use and use the right tool in the
right way at the right time.


There are ways that slides can be horrible. If they accompany a one
directional old school lecture with no active learning going on. If
they convey enough information so that students zone out because they
can just get the slides later but then realize that the slides aren't
nearly enough on their own or when slides drive the direction and pace
of the lesson as opposed to the actual class situation.

On the other hand slides can be effective - they can be a time saver
if you want to bring up say, a definition or long quote as an example
and indeed I've seen some slide decks that form the basis of excellent
reference materials. They can also provide a focal point for both
students and instructors. 

Of course just about any practice can be good or bad. A few years ago
before the pendulum started swinging back, discovery learning was all
the rage, of course everyone ignored the difficulties in setting up a
strong discovery learning experience and just told teachers they
should do all discovery all the time. To them, since I was tenured and
in general have an irreverent streak when it comes to superiors I'd
say things like "well, in the history of mankind only two people
discovery-learned calculus" or something similar.

Well, as a practice, doing a discovery lesson where the experience
isn't sufficiently set up and scaffolded and the students not
sufficiently prepared can be disastrous. In fact, I'd go as far as to
say that a bad lecture can be better than a bad discovery based
lesson.

Now to get back to slides, I should probably share where I'm coming
from. I started teaching in the early 90s. The only slides you could
use were old school overhead projector slides. You also probably had
to hand write them. I guess professors at the college level could
print them but high schools just didn't have those fancy
resources. I had a couple of math colleagues who made heavy use of
slides but more by using the overhead as a marker based board and
wrote on the pages live.

When I started teaching CS, I was in a traditional classroom with a
chalkboard. We only went in to the computer lab when the kids were
programming. I could deliver instruction in the computer lab - it even
had a VGA overhead projector that wasn't all that terrible but
teaching in the computer lab was less than ideal - there was no room
on the desks for students to work between the large computers, big CRT
monitors and keyboards and the sight lines were awful. When we were
dumped into the computer labs to teach full time, at least we were
allowed to rearrange the room to make it better and flatscreen
monitors have made a huge difference for desk space.

Looking back, our greatest tech was that graph maker thing. For you
youngsters, it was like a projector screen that you pulled down in
front of a chalkboard. It had a grid of holes in it. You'd go over the
whole surface with a dusty eraser which would let the chalk dust
through the holes. Pull up the screen and you ended up with a
perforated grid on the board - instant graph. Pretty cool tech.

So, I came up as a teacher without slides.

Now, younger teachers have shared with me what they like about
slides.

A recurring theme was that it meant that there was something to give a
student who missed class. This can be a benefit, particularly if the
slides are enough to catch the student up. I'm guessing that usually,
they can help but hopefully they aren't enough. Why hopefully? Well,
if a student can get the full value of the lesson by merely reading
through the slides then how much value is the teacher bringing to the
class. I think more often the slides can provide some information but
that absent student will still have to do some extra to catch
up.

So what did I do without slides? Well, back in the day, students took
notes so I paired the absent student with a present one who had good
notes. Often at Stuy the absent kid would take it upon them self to do
this with or for a friend.

I also know that instructors often share slides with other
instructors. This seems bigger at the college level. Well, we used to
share lesson plans. It wasn't uncommon for a teacher to have a book of
lesson plans for a semester or a folder or something similar. The
first time I taught linear algebra, I borrowed the lesson plans from a
colleague. These were likely far better than slides unless the slides
had copious presenter notes.

I've also had people tell me that they use slides to present prompts,
key questions, and things like code snippets.

Using them this way sounds great to me. I don't do that with slides
but I'd have code snippets ready in an Emacs buffer and key questions
written in my lesson plans. Sounds like a good use of slides but it's
also something that can be accomplished without slides.

When you cut away the chaff, most of the people who told me they liked
slides basically seem to be using them as visible lesson plans with
time saver materials. Sounds good to me, but personally I think I'm more
effective without them. At times, I like the idea of instantly
bringing up a quote or a definition or a prompt but I like the pacing
I get sometimes when writing it out or when I have students actually
copy something down. It's a different type of engagement.

Besides, for me the slides would be too constraining. I've frequently
likened teaching to rap or stand up comedy. You've got your core
material (the lesson or the main lyrics or routine), you're catch
phrases or go to lines (I don't get no respect, or "put your hands in
the air like you just don't care"), and then the improv stuff. For me,
if I had detailed slides, I know that it would keep me from the improv
stuff which includes riffing off discussion and yes, at times
tangents. I think my lessons would lose a lot of whatever richness
would normally be there.

That's just me.

That brings up another issue in terms of "best practices." Too often
the "experts" and "thought leaders" who force "the research" upon us
hit us with a one size fits all. When I started, everyone had to use
discovery learning (not to be confused with group work or other
similar practices). A while later, discovery became the rage. More
recently, although not being touted as the be all and end all, direct
instruction has been making a comeback, albeit with active learning. If you
didn't teach using the chosen method, you were "ineffective"
regardless of how good you actually were.

The truth is, there are multiple things that go into a practice being
effective. Obviously the students in a particular class. The specific
topic also comes into play. All sorts of other school factors also
have to be considered - class size, composition, even time of day and
what else is going on within the kids schedules.

On top of all of those though is the one factor that is almost always
left out - the teacher. Most teachers have their own strengths and
weaknesses and also our preferences.

If an effective teacher leans
towards direct instruction with slides, then all things being equal,
that will likely be one of their more effective practices more often
than not. Sure, there will be times to mix in other practices and
there might even be classes where using a whole other practice would
be better for the majority of lessons but the "all things equal"
default probably should lean towards a teachers strength, providing
that that strength can be a good practice.

For example, I'm not a cooperative learning guy. Sure, I've done it -
I've set up the roles, prepared the materials, and employed the
practice but it was never my strength and at the end of the day, other
than as a change of pace, my students didn't enjoy my cooperative
learning lessons as much as my other lessons.

Contrast that to one of my mentor teachers who was all cooperative all
the time. Cooperative learning went over way better for him but if he
tried to teach like me, it didn't take.

At the end of the day we were both well respected, well liked, and got
good results but ended up leaning on different practices to get there.

Closing up, I'll also give one more reason why I don't do slide decks
and that's pure laziness. Even when I teach a class over year after
year, each class is a little different so I rethink my lesson plans
and make new notes. Sure, the lessons are largely similar so the
lesson plans are mostly the same but some details always change.

If I used slides, I'd have to revise them or remake them every time
through and I'm not nearly organized enough to do this. I'm far
too lazy. 

So, that's it - slide decks - not for me but for others they can be
effective when used well.

Sorry if my last post implied otherwise 



