---
title: SIGCSETS 2025 part 3 - BOFs
date: 2025-03-12T11:02:32-04:00
tags:
- SIGCSETS
- SIGCSE
- BOFS
categories:
- SIGCSE
draft: false
--- 

Once again, there were three sets of Birds of a Feather sessions. Two
at the end of the day on Thursday but before the big reception and one
partly over lunch on Friday.

Last year I enjoyed two but walked out o the third mid session. This
year, I enjoyed two but just missed the third because I got caught up
talking to an old friend.

Both of the sessions I enjoyed suffered from the usual BOF problems -
since the sessions were well attended and time was short, it was tough
to get deep discussions going and also keep  the entire BOF together.

While both of the sessions I attended had to deal with these issues,
the organizing teams of both really did a great job within the
constraints of the session.

The first session was "Teaching Computing in Prison" run by Emma
Hogan, Keith O'Hara, and Leo Porter. I already knew Emma and Keith but
didn't realize they were running the session so it was nice to chat
with them prior to the BOF starting.

Now, I've never taught in prison. The closest was in my very first
class of my very first year of teaching. I taught a remedial math
class and a good portion of the students in that class were recently
out of prison and some would be soon to go in. I was also a little
familiar with a coding bootcamp type effort but I think that focused
on people recently released and not those actually still incarcerated. 

The BOF was fascinating. It's amazing the restrictions both
instructors in prison as well as the students have to work
under. Nothing connected to the internet, frequent interruptions
(alarms), students coming and going and that's the easy stuff. In many
cases, can't even run their actual code - it has to be printed out and
submitted to the instructor who can then, if they chose to and have
the time, they can run the code (after typing it in) and test it and
give feedback.

Other interesting tidbits, though I could be misremembering some of
this - neither the students nor the instructors decides who gets into
the class. It's assigned by some third party (the prison
administration???). The prisoners in the program are all part of the
same major and it isn't CS.

The whole thing was fascinating. I'm interested in learning more. A
big question I have is what's the point of the CS course or the major
for that matter? Pure academic exploration? It seems a poor design for
job prospects although that's something that Keith brought up - the
push and pull between what he taught which was purely academic, being
from a small liberal arts college and the prison's desire for a more
jobs oriented program.

The other BOF I attended and loved was titled "Towards a Computer
Science Curriculum â€œMicrokernel" and raised the questions of if
there's a common core that could/should be taught in CS. This was very
much related to some of the themes that came up during Friday's
keynote and is something I've thought long and hard about for years.

Many similar themes as the keynote but we talked about them in small
groups - do we need all the courses that we teach? Do we need to teach
as much about sorting as we do? What's the point of teaching any
particular topic?

I don't have too much to say in terms of specifics, but I'm glad this
conversation is happening and happening in public. It's so hard to
move institutions and even when you can steer the ship it can take
years or even longer. At Hunter, there were some people who wanted to
reform the CS major but all it took was a couple of "we always did it
this way" people to sink any innovation.

Still, with the conversation happening maybe some places will have
success.

So, those were the keynotes. Stay tuned for more on a bunch of other
types of sessions.




** prison


** CS Microkernel BOF
